OSASINFRA-3066: Added migration procedure for Kuryr SDN. (#54822)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/nw-kuryr-migration.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * networking/ovn_kubernetes_network_provider/migrate-from-openshift-sdn.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="nw-kuryr-migration_{context}"]
= Migrating to the OVN-Kubernetes network plugin

As a cluster administrator, you can change the network plug-in for your cluster to OVN-Kubernetes.
During the migration, you must reboot every node in your cluster.

[IMPORTANT]
====
While performing the migration, your cluster is unavailable and workloads might be interrupted.
Perform the migration only when an interruption in service is acceptable.
====

.Prerequisites

> * A cluster configured with the Kuryr CNI network plug-in in the network policy isolation mode.

Reviewer: "in the network policy isolation mode" is only specific to OpenShiftSDN, let's remove this.

* Install the OpenShift CLI (`oc`).
* Access to the cluster as a user with the `cluster-admin` role.
* A recent backup of the etcd database is available.
* A reboot can be triggered manually for each node.
* The cluster is in a known good state, without any errors.
* Install `jq` tool
* Install Python interpreter
* Install `openstacksdk` python package 
* Install `openstack` cli tool
* Access to the underlying {rh-openstack}

.Procedure

. To backup the configuration for the cluster network, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc get Network.config.openshift.io cluster -o yaml > cluster-openshift-sdn.yaml

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
$ oc get Network.config.openshift.io cluster -o yaml > cluster-kuryr.yaml
```

portal/OpenStack client.
====

. Confirm that the migration succeeded, and then remove the migration resources:

.. To confirm that the network plugin is OVN-Kubernetes, enter the following command.
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get network.config/cluster -o jsonpath='{.status.networkType}{"\n"}'
----
+
 The value of `status.networkType` must be `OVNKubernetes`.

.. To confirm that the cluster nodes are in the `Ready` state, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get nodes
----

.. To confirm that your pods are not in an error state, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get pods --all-namespaces -o wide --sort-by='{.spec.nodeName}'
----
+
If pods on a node are in an error state, reboot that node.

.. To confirm that all of the cluster Operators are not in an abnormal state, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get co
----
+
The status of every cluster Operator must be the following: `AVAILABLE="True"`, `PROGRESSING="False"`, `DEGRADED="False"`. If a cluster Operator is not available or degraded, check the logs for the cluster Operator for more information.

> IMPORTANT: Do not proceed if the any of the previous verification steps indicate errors, but note, that there can be pods with Terminating state due to the finalzers which will be removed during cleanup step.

Author: Added note about pods in Terminating state.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[IMPORTANT]
====
Do not proceed if the any of the previous verification steps indicate errors.

You might encounter pods that have a  `Terminating` state due to finalizers that are removed during clean up. They are not an error indication.  
====
```

Is this an accurate treatment?

          "v6InternalSubnet":"<ipv6_subnet>" <4>
    }}}}'
----
+
--
<1> The MTU for the Geneve overlay network. This value is normally configured automatically, but if the nodes in your cluster do not all use the same MTU, then you must set this explicitly to `100` less than the smallest node MTU value.
<2> The UDP port for the Geneve overlay network. If a value is not specified, the default is `6081`. The port cannot be the same as the VXLAN port that is used by Kuryr. The default value for the VXLAN port is `4789`.
<3> An IPv4 address range for internal use by OVN-Kubernetes. You must ensure that the IP address range does not overlap with any other subnet used by your {product-title} installation. The IP address range must be larger than the maximum number of nodes that can be added to the cluster. The default value is `100.64.0.0/16`.
<4> An IPv6 address range for internal use by OVN-Kubernetes. You must ensure that the IP address range does not overlap with any other subnet used by your {product-title} installation. The IP address range must be larger than the maximum number of nodes that can be added to the cluster. The default value is `fd98::/48`.

> --

Reviewer 4: That was my mistake, I hadn't seen the "where:" + definition format used in the docs before and wasn't sure if it was applicable.

====

. Confirm the status of the new machine configuration on the hosts:

.. To list the machine configuration state and the name of the applied machine configuration, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc describe node | egrep "hostname|machineconfig"
----
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
kubernetes.io/hostname=master-0
machineconfiguration.openshift.io/currentConfig: rendered-master-c53e221d9d24e1c8bb6ee89dd3d8ad7b <2>
machineconfiguration.openshift.io/desiredConfig: rendered-master-c53e221d9d24e1c8bb6ee89dd3d8ad7b <3>
machineconfiguration.openshift.io/reason:
machineconfiguration.openshift.io/state: Done <1>
----

.. Referring to that output, verify that the following statements are true:
+
--
<1> The value of `machineconfiguration.openshift.io/state` field is `Done`.
<2> The value of the `machineconfiguration.openshift.io/currentConfig` field is equal to the value of the `machineconfiguration.openshift.io/desiredConfig` <3> field.
--

.. To confirm that the machine config is correct, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc get machineconfig <machine_config_name> -o yaml | grep ExecStart <1>
> ----
> +
> --
> <1> Specifies the name of the machine config from the `machineconfiguration.openshift.io/currentConfig` field.
> --

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
$ oc get machineconfig <machine_config_name> -o yaml | grep ExecStart <1>
----
<1> Specifies the name of the machine config from the `machineconfiguration.openshift.io/currentConfig` field.
```

Should be valid w/out the open block.

portal/OpenStack client.
====

. Confirm that the migration succeeded, and then remove the migration resources:

.. To confirm that the network plugin is OVN-Kubernetes, enter the following command.
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get network.config/cluster -o jsonpath='{.status.networkType}{"\n"}'
----
+
 The value of `status.networkType` must be `OVNKubernetes`.

.. To confirm that the cluster nodes are in the `Ready` state, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get nodes
----

.. To confirm that your pods are not in an error state, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get pods --all-namespaces -o wide --sort-by='{.spec.nodeName}'
----
+
If pods on a node are in an error state, reboot that node.

.. To confirm that all of the cluster Operators are not in an abnormal state, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get co
----
+
The status of every cluster Operator must be the following: `AVAILABLE="True"`, `PROGRESSING="False"`, `DEGRADED="False"`. If a cluster Operator is not available or degraded, check the logs for the cluster Operator for more information.

[IMPORTANT]
====

> Do not proceed if the any of the previous verification steps indicate errors.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Do not proceed if any of the previous verification steps indicate errors.
```

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * networking/ovn_kubernetes_network_provider/migrate-from-kuryr-sdn.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="nw-kuryr-migration_{context}"]
= Migrating to the OVN-Kubernetes network plugin

> As a cluster administrator, you can change the network plug-in for your cluster to OVN-Kubernetes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As a cluster administrator, you can change the network plugin for your cluster to OVN-Kubernetes.
```

[IMPORTANT]
====
During the migration, you must reboot every node in your cluster.
Your cluster is unavailable and workloads might be interrupted.
Perform the migration only if an interruption in service is acceptable.
====

.Prerequisites

* You installed the OpenShift CLI (`oc`).
* You have access to the cluster as a user with the `cluster-admin` role.
* You have a recent backup of the etcd database is available.
* You can manually reboot each node.
* The cluster you plan to migrate is in a known good state, without any errors.
* You installed the Python interpreter.
* You installed the `openstacksdk` python package.
* You installed the `openstack` CLI tool.
* You have access to the underlying {rh-openstack} cloud.

.Procedure

> . You can backup the configuration for the cluster network by running the following command

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. Back up the configuration for the cluster network by running the following command:
```

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get Network.config.openshift.io cluster -o yaml > cluster-kuryr.yaml
----

> . To set the `CLUSTERID` variable, run the following

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. To set the `CLUSTERID` variable, run the following command:
```

> . To set the `CLUSTERID` variable, run the following

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. To set the `CLUSTERID` variable, run the following command:
```

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ CLUSTERID=$(oc get infrastructure.config.openshift.io cluster -o=jsonpath='{.status.infrastructureName}')
----

. To prepare all the nodes for the migration, set the `migration` field on the Cluster Network Operator configuration object by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc patch Network.operator.openshift.io cluster --type='merge' \
  --patch '{ "spec": { "migration": { "networkType": "OVNKubernetes" } } }'
----
+
[NOTE]
====
This step does not deploy OVN-Kubernetes immediately. Specifying the `migration` field triggers the Machine Config Operator (MCO) to apply new machine configs to all the nodes in the cluster. This prepares the cluster for the OVN-Kubernetes deployment.
====

> . Optional: You can customize the following settings for OVN-Kubernetes for your network infrastructure requirements:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. Optional: Customize the following settings for OVN-Kubernetes for your network infrastructure requirements:
```

+
--
* Maximum transmission unit (MTU)
* Geneve (Generic Network Virtualization Encapsulation) overlay network port
* OVN-Kubernetes IPv4 internal subnet
* OVN-Kubernetes IPv6 internal subnet
--
+
To customize these settings, enter and customize the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc patch Network.operator.openshift.io cluster --type=merge \
  --patch '{
    "spec":{
      "defaultNetwork":{
        "ovnKubernetesConfig":{
          "mtu":<mtu>,
          "genevePort":<port>,
          "v4InternalSubnet":"<ipv4_subnet>",
          "v6InternalSubnet":"<ipv6_subnet>"
    }}}}'
----
+
where:
+
--
`mtu`::

> The MTU for the Geneve overlay network. This value is normally configured automatically, but if the nodes in your cluster do not all use the same MTU, then you must set this explicitly to `100` less than the smallest node MTU value.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Specifies the MTU for the Geneve overlay network. This value is normally configured automatically, but if the nodes in your cluster do not all use the same MTU, then you must set this explicitly to `100` less than the smallest node MTU value.
```

`port`::

> The UDP port for the Geneve overlay network. If a value is not specified, the default is `6081`. The port cannot be the same as the VXLAN port that is used by Kuryr. The default value for the VXLAN port is `4789`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Specifies the UDP port for the Geneve overlay network. If a value is not specified, the default is `6081`. The port cannot be the same as the VXLAN port that is used by Kuryr. The default value for the VXLAN port is `4789`.
```

`ipv4_subnet`::

> An IPv4 address range for internal use by OVN-Kubernetes. You must ensure that the IP address range does not overlap with any other subnet used by your {product-title} installation. The IP address range must be larger than the maximum number of nodes that can be added to the cluster. The default value is `100.64.0.0/16`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Specifies an IPv4 address range for internal use by OVN-Kubernetes. You must ensure that the IP address range does not overlap with any other subnet used by your {product-title} installation. The IP address range must be larger than the maximum number of nodes that can be added to the cluster. The default value is `100.64.0.0/16`.
```

`ipv6_subnet`::

> An IPv6 address range for internal use by OVN-Kubernetes. You must ensure that the IP address range does not overlap with any other subnet used by your {product-title} installation. The IP address range must be larger than the maximum number of nodes that can be added to the cluster. The default value is `fd98::/48`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Specifies an IPv6 address range for internal use by OVN-Kubernetes. You must ensure that the IP address range does not overlap with any other subnet used by your {product-title} installation. The IP address range must be larger than the maximum number of nodes that can be added to the cluster. The default value is `fd98::/48`.
```

machine-config-daemon-fc946                  2/2     Running   0          43h
machine-config-daemon-g2v28                  2/2     Running   0          43h
machine-config-daemon-gcl4f                  2/2     Running   0          43h
machine-config-daemon-l5tnv                  2/2     Running   0          43h
machine-config-operator-79d9c55d5-hth92      1/1     Running   0          37m
machine-config-server-bsc8h                  1/1     Running   0          43h
machine-config-server-hklrm                  1/1     Running   0          43h
machine-config-server-k9rtx                  1/1     Running   0          43h
----
+
The names for the config daemon pods are in the following format: `machine-config-daemon-<seq>`. The `<seq>` value is a random five character alphanumeric sequence.

... Display the pod log for the first machine config daemon pod shown in the previous output by enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc logs <pod> -n openshift-machine-config-operator
----
+
where:

<pod>:: Specifies the name of a machine config daemon pod.

... Resolve any errors in the logs shown by the output from the previous command.

> . To start the migration, configure the OVN-Kubernetes network plug-in by using one of the following commands:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. To start the migration, configure the OVN-Kubernetes network plugin by using one of the following commands:
```

    "spec": {
      "clusterNetwork": [
        {
          "cidr": "<cidr>",
          "hostPrefix": "<prefix>"
        }
      ]
      "networkType": "OVNKubernetes"
    }
  }'
----
+
where:

<cidr>:: Specifies a CIDR block.
<prefix>:: Specifies a slice of the CIDR block that is apportioned to each node in your cluster.
+
[IMPORTANT]
====
You cannot change the service network address block during the migration.

You cannot use any CIDR block that overlaps with the `100.64.0.0/16` CIDR block because the OVN-Kubernetes network provider uses this block internally.
====

. Verify that the Multus daemon set rollout is complete by entering the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc -n openshift-multus rollout status daemonset/multus
----
+
The name of the Multus pods is in the form of `multus-<xxxxx>`, where `<xxxxx>` is a random sequence of letters. It might take several moments for the pods to restart.
+
.Example output
[source,text]
----
Waiting for daemon set "multus" rollout to finish: 1 out of 6 new pods have been updated...
...
Waiting for daemon set "multus" rollout to finish: 5 of 6 updated pods are available...
daemon set "multus" successfully rolled out
----

> . To complete the migration, reboot each node in your cluster. For example, you can use a bash script similar to the following example. The script assumes that you can connect to each host by using `ssh` and that you have configured `sudo` to not prompt for a password.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. To complete the migration, reboot each node in your cluster. For example, you can use a bash script similar to the following example. The script assumes that you can connect to each host by using `ssh` and that you have configured `sudo` to not prompt for a password:
```

+
[source,bash]
----
#!/bin/bash

for ip in $(oc get nodes  -o jsonpath='{.items[*].status.addresses[?(@.type=="InternalIP")].address}')
do
   echo "reboot node $ip"
   ssh -o StrictHostKeyChecking=no core@$ip sudo shutdown -r -t 3
done
----
+
[NOTE]
====

> If ssh access is not available, you could alternatively use `openstack` command:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If SSH access is not available, you can alternatively use the `openstack` command:
```

> If SSH access is not available, you can alternatively use the `openstack` command:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If SSH access is not available, you can use the `openstack` command:
```

[source,terminal]
----
$ for name in $(openstack server list --name ${CLUSTERID}\* -f value -c Name); do openstack server reboot $name; done
----

> It might also be able to reboot each node through the management portal for
> your infrastructure provider. Otherwise, contact appropriate authority for
> either gaining access to the virtual machines through `ssh` or the management
> portal/OpenStack client.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Alternatively, you might be able to to reboot each node through the management portal for
your infrastructure provider. Otherwise, contact the appropriate authority to
either gain access to the virtual machines through SSH or the management
portal and OpenStack client.
```

====

> . Verification

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.Verification
```

Reviewer 3: This and the level changes that follow it all need to happen together.

> .. Confirm that the migration succeeded, and then remove the migration resources:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. Confirm that the migration succeeded, and then remove the migration resources:
```

> ... To confirm that the network plugin is OVN-Kubernetes, enter the following command.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.. To confirm that the network plugin is OVN-Kubernetes, enter the following command.
```

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get network.config/cluster -o jsonpath='{.status.networkType}{"\n"}'
----
+
The value of `status.networkType` must be `OVNKubernetes`.

> ... To confirm that the cluster nodes are in the `Ready` state, enter the following command:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.. To confirm that the cluster nodes are in the `Ready` state, enter the following command:
```

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get nodes
----

> ... To confirm that your pods are not in an error state, enter the following command:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.. To confirm that your pods are not in an error state, enter the following command:
```

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get pods --all-namespaces -o wide --sort-by='{.spec.nodeName}'
----
+
If pods on a node are in an error state, reboot that node.

> ... To confirm that all of the cluster Operators are not in an abnormal state, enter the following command:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.. To confirm that all of the cluster Operators are not in an abnormal state, enter the following command:
```

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get co
----
+
The status of every cluster Operator must be the following: `AVAILABLE="True"`, `PROGRESSING="False"`, `DEGRADED="False"`. If a cluster Operator is not available or degraded, check the logs for the cluster Operator for more information.
+
[IMPORTANT]
====
Do not proceed if any of the previous verification steps indicate errors.
You might encounter pods that have a `Terminating` state due to finalizers that are removed during clean up. They are not an error indication.
====
+

> .. If the migration completed and your cluster is in a good state, remove the migration configuration from the CNO configuration object by entering the following command:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. If the migration completed and your cluster is in a good state, remove the migration configuration from the CNO configuration object by entering the following command:
```

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * networking/ovn_kubernetes_network_provider/migrate-from-kuryr-sdn.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="nw-kuryr-migration_{context}"]
= Migrating to the OVN-Kubernetes network plugin

As a cluster administrator, you can change the network plug-in for your cluster to OVN-Kubernetes.

[IMPORTANT]
====
During the migration, you must reboot every node in your cluster.

Your cluster is unavailable and workloads might be interrupted.

Perform the migration only if an interruption in service is acceptable.
====

.Prerequisites

> * Install the OpenShift CLI (`oc`).

Reviewer 3: FWIW, ISG guidance is to avoid passive voice whenever possible. I'm not sure of any guidance that asks for passive voice in prerequisites.

> * Install the OpenShift CLI (`oc`).

Author: Uhm. @maxwelldb, @kelbrown20 so what's the conclusion here? should I change it back to non passive?

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ CLUSTERID=$(oc get infrastructure.config.openshift.io cluster -o=jsonpath='{.status.infrastructureName}')
----

. To prepare all the nodes for the migration, set the `migration` field on the Cluster Network Operator configuration object by entering the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc patch Network.operator.openshift.io cluster --type='merge' \
  --patch '{ "spec": { "migration": { "networkType": "OVNKubernetes" } } }'
----
+
[NOTE]
====
This step does not deploy OVN-Kubernetes immediately. Instead, specifying the `migration` field triggers the Machine Config Operator (MCO) to apply new machine configs to all the nodes in the cluster in preparation for the OVN-Kubernetes deployment.
====

. Optional: You can customize the following settings for OVN-Kubernetes to meet your network infrastructure requirements:
+
--
* Maximum transmission unit (MTU)
* Geneve (Generic Network Virtualization Encapsulation) overlay network port
* OVN-Kubernetes IPv4 internal subnet
* OVN-Kubernetes IPv6 internal subnet
--
+
To customize these settings, enter and customize the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc patch Network.operator.openshift.io cluster --type=merge \

Reviewer 5: @kelbrown20 The ability to use `where:` and a DL is valid and is described in [this section ](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/blob/main/contributing_to_docs/doc_guidelines.adoc#code-blocks-command-syntax-and-example-output)of the contrib guide.

> $ oc patch Network.operator.openshift.io cluster --type=merge \

Reviewer 4: Oh gotcha! I've never seen the format like this before which is why I referenced the callouts. Thank you for the info!

> $ oc patch Network.operator.openshift.io cluster --type=merge \

Author: Okay… so which style should I follow?

...
Waiting for daemon set "multus" rollout to finish: 5 of 6 updated pods are available...
daemon set "multus" successfully rolled out
----

. To complete the migration, reboot each node in your cluster. For example, you can use a bash script similar to the following example. The script assumes that you can connect to each host by using `ssh` and that you have configured `sudo` to not prompt for a password.
+
[source,bash]
----
#!/bin/bash

for ip in $(oc get nodes  -o jsonpath='{.items[*].status.addresses[?(@.type=="InternalIP")].address}')
do
   echo "reboot node $ip"
   ssh -o StrictHostKeyChecking=no core@$ip sudo shutdown -r -t 3
done
----
+
[NOTE]
====
If ssh access is not available, you could alternatively use `openstack` command
to do so:
[source,terminal]
----
$ for name in $(openstack server list --name ${CLUSTERID}\* -f value -c Name); do openstack server reboot $name; done
----
It might also be able to reboot each node through the management portal for
your infrastructure provider. Otherwise contact appropriate authority for
either gaining access to the virtual machines through ssh or management
portal/OpenStack client.
====

> . Confirm that the migration succeeded, and then remove the migration resources:

Author: Not sure if I understand you.

> . Confirm that the migration succeeded, and then remove the migration resources:

Reviewer 3: @gryf The idea is in the Procedure Verification section in https://redhat-documentation.github.io/modular-docs/#con-creating-procedure-modules_writing-mod-docs

However, since it seems like the cleanup steps are mandatory, I wouldn't change this at this time.

+
The status of every cluster Operator must be the following: `AVAILABLE="True"`, `PROGRESSING="False"`, `DEGRADED="False"`. If a cluster Operator is not available or degraded, check the logs for the cluster Operator for more information.

IMPORTANT: Do not proceed if the any of the previous verification steps indicate errors.

> . If the migration completed and your cluster is in a good state, remove the migration configuration from the CNO configuration object by entering the following command:

Reviewer 6: > If the migration is completed and your cluster is in a good state

Should we define what is a cluster in a good state? As far as I understand, at this point, it is expected to have some pods (multus pods, for example) stuck in the Terminating state until the Kuryr finalizers are removed in the next steps.

Author: @imatza-rh we can add this as subsequent patch for the final version.

Reviewer 3: @gryf Any changes incoming with respect to this, too?

Author: ditto.

Author: @maxwelldb added a note about this.
